# 1-512

[**p. 49**] *The difference between the geometric mind and the cunning
mind:* In the first, principles are tangible, but removed from
everyday use; so that it is difficult to turn the mind to them without
practice: but if ever it [the mind] turns there, the principles will
seem plain; and he would necessarily have a completely false mind to
reason poorly from principles so grand that it is nearly impossible to
escape from them.

But in the cunning mind, principles are in everyday use and known by
the whole world.  The mind doesn't have to be turned, nor forced; it is
only a question of having a proper viewpoint, but it must be good: for
principles are so slight and in such a great number, that it is nearly
impossible that one does not escape from him.  Now, the omission of
one principle leads to a mistake; thus, he must have very clear sight
to see all principles, and then an exact mind to not reason falsely
based on known principles.

All the geometers--thus--would be cunning if they had good sight, for
they do not reason falsely on principles they know, and the cunning
minds would be geometers, if they could apply their vision to
unaccustomed geometric principles.

For this reason, thus, certain subtle minds are not geometers: it is
that they are not able to totally apply themselves to geometric
principles; but for this reason geometers are not cunning: it is that
they don't see what is in front of them, and that they are accustomed
to clear principles and the crudeness of geometry, and only to reason
after having well reviewed and managed their principles, they are lost
in cunning things, where principles do not allow themselves to be
managed thus.  They [principles] are hardly seen, they are felt sooner
than they are [**50**] seen; it is infinitely difficult to make them
feel those which they do not feel by themselves; these [principles]
are so slight and so numerous, that he must have very fine and very
clear senses to detect them; and to judge rightly and correctly
according to these feelings, without ability most remember the
demonstration by its order, just as in geometry, because one cannot
own the principles in this way, and that this would be a limitless
thing to undertake.  He must see, all at a moment, the thing with one
glance, and not reason by steps, at least to a certain degree.  And it
is unusual that geometers have cunning and that the cunning have
geometry, because geometers want to geometrically draw these subtle
things, and make themselves ridiculous, wanting to begin with
definitions and then move to principles, which is not the way to work
in this sort of reasoning.  It is not that the mind can't do it; but
does it implicitly and naturally without art, for the expression of it
is admitted by all men, and the wisdom of it only appears to few men.

And the subtle minds, in contrast, having thus become accustomed to
judge by a single view, are so astonished,--when some propositions
are presented to them where they understand nothing and where to
understand, they must admit definitions and such sterile principles,
which they are not accustomed to see in such detail,--that they are
repelled from them and disgusted by them.

But the false minds are never cunning nor geometric.

The geometers, who are only geometers, have--thus--a right mind, but
able only to explain to them well everything by definition and
principle; or else, they are false and intolerable, for they are
correct only about very clear principles.

And the cunning who are only cunning, don't have the patience to
descend down to the first principles of speculative things and of the
imagination, which have never seen the whole world, and seen past
custom completely.
